The lead up to WW2 is, in my opinion, more interesting than the war itself.

LET’S DIVE RIGHT IN!

The first event in the lead up to WWII was the end of WWI. Ironic, I know.

The Treaty of Versailles

The Treaty of Versailles wasn’t made to be fair. It was made with the set interest of vengeance towards the Central Powers, particularly Germany. The French, who had suffered heavily in the fighting, were on a vengeful path and wanted the treaty to completely crush German spirits.

Versailles and the other treaties ending the 1st World War treated the Central Powers as if they had all been fully occupied and utterly crushed despite the fact most of the fighting had happened within Entente territory.

Many future Axis powers would come out of this treaty.

The Bulgarian Situation

The history of Bulgaria in the early 20th century has been difficult to see. After seeing Greece and Serbia annex much of the Macedonian lands promised to Bulgaria, they invaded only to be attacked by Romania and the Ottoman Empire shrinking further. Their defeat in WW1 saw them lose West Thrace to Greece and what little of Macedonia they had to Yugoslavia. Many of these territories were ethnically Bulgarian.


So it wasn’t a surprise that Bulgaria would ally with the country who was the biggest threat to Serbia, now Yugoslavia, and Greece, Italy. As Italy began to expand into the Balkans, Bulgaria saw the opportunity to profit from some of the territory that Italy didn’t want.

The Hungarian Situation

The 1st World War saw Austria-Hungary completely dissolved. Hungary, the second half of the namesake, in particular saw not only its non-Hungarian lands taken but even regions that had majority Hungarian populations given off to be ruled by the Czechs and Romanians.


This left many Hungarians finding themselves across the border from the country that beard their name. Hungary felt abandoned by the Entente. So when Germany approached them promising them their old lands, Hungary quickly aligned itself with the Axis.

The Italian Situation

In the Kingdom of Italy, the circumstances were quite different. The Italians had won the war but during peace talks were horrified to find that they had been stabbed in the back by the Entente.

Before Italy joined WW1, the Central Powers and Entente tried to sway them to their respective sides with promises of territorial gain. Eventually, they sided with the Entente after they were promised Tyrol, Istria, and the Dalmatian Coast.


However, during Versailles, they were treated as a minor despite heavy casualties and watched much of the territory promised to them given to the Serbs instead.


The Italians were left very bitter about this especially since the territory they didn’t get was given to Serbia which had capitulated pretty early on in the war and, in their eyes, hadn’t earned it. We’ll get more into Italy later on.

The Japanese Situation

Japan, like Italy, also joined the Entente during WW1. However, they got what they wanted out of it, annexing many German colonies in China and Oceania.

However, now that the Japanese plans for expansion into German territory were fulfilled, their eyes shifted towards their old allies, towards British Malaysia, French Indochina, the American Philippines, and China.

Japan went on to expand into China by invading Manchuria establishing a puppet state. China would later collapse into civil war. They left the League of Nations after it condemned them for their actions in Manchuria.


Relations soured further between Japan and the Entente as Britain refused to renew their alliance with the Japanese out of fear of war with the U.S. They would go on to renounce several naval treaties agreeing to keep their navy small.

Essentially, Japanese interests for expansion were their main reason for allying with the Germans as further expansion required wars with the Allied powers.

The German Situation

Finally, and most importantly, Germany. They lost 13% of their territory including, like in Hungary, land that was majority German. Even Denmark which hadn’t even entered the war was given Northern Schleswig.


On top of this, the Rhineland, Germany’s main industrial area, was made a demilitarized zone and the army was downsized to only 100,000 men. They were forced to pay war reparations of $300 Billion. And the icing on the cake, they had to take full responsibility for a war that they hadn’t even started.

The Germans, a historically militaristic people, were left in a nation that was on a path to destruction. Hundreds of thousands of soldiers were now unemployed, Germany was in extreme debt, and inflation sky rocketed. Germany had to take out loans from the U.S. to continue to pay off their debts. And when the Great Depression came to America, they demanded all their loans be payed off.

Germany eventually suffered TWO GREAT DEPRESSIONS, and when they couldn’t pay off their debts, the industry in the Rhineland was invaded by Belgium and France.

Many Germans incorrectly believed that the war could have still been won if Germany hadn’t been betrayed by the new Democratic Government. Soon, political popularity shifted towards either the Far-Left or Far-Right. Popularity for Communism, however, faded after a failed Communist Revolution in Bavaria.

Italy’s Descent into Fascism

In Italy, discontent led to the March on Rome. Here, Benito Mussolini and his new Fascist party sieged Rome. The situation was only pacified when King Victor Emmanuel III made Mussolini Prime Minister transferring power to a new Fascist government.

Mussolini was very popular among the Italians with his promises of great territorial expansion into Africa and the Balkans and the idea of a revived Roman Empire that would bring Italy greatness once more.

Italy’s first major venture in expansion was an invasion of Ethiopia. They had gone to war with Ethiopia once before and embarrassingly lost. Victory in the 2nd Italo-Abyssian War boosted popular approval of Fascist Italy and discredited the League of Nations as a peace-keeping force as they stood idle despite Ethiopian pleas for assistance.


Germany’s Descent into Fascism

All the misery and hatred in Germany allowed for a little party known as the National Socialist German Workers' Party, or Nazi Party, with its rhetoric pushing the blame of Germany’s failure to minorities and its talk about making Germany great once more to gain popularity.

Eventually, the leader of the Nazi Party, one Adolf Hitler, ran for president of the Wiemar Republic being beaten only be decorated war hero Paul Von Hindenburg. However, Hindenburg was convinced to make Hitler chancellor essentially using him as a puppet to keep Nazi supporters happy while giving him no actual power.

What could possibly go wrong!?

I’ll tell you what.

Hindenburg died.

And who was next in line to be in charge of the country?

Hint: It starts with an H and with an itler.

Over time, the Nazi party used its popularity to consolidate power, purge opposition, indoctrinate the populace, and remove “undesirables” such as Jews, alcoholics, homeless, and unemployed.

As well, Germany began to improve relations with the Soviet Union extending diplomatic relations and agreeing to non-aggression pacts.

The new German Reich worked to improve their economy doing it pretty quickly. They got to show their economic revival during the 1936 Olympics hosted by Germany where they gained a great propaganda victory not only for Germany but for Fascism as a whole.

Germany Looks Outward

On March 7th, the military was ordered to enter the Rhineland Demilitarized Zone under orders to immediately retreat if France and Britain responded militarily. Instead, they stood down, issuing minor diplomatic objections. Germans troops entered the Rhine to cheering German crowds.

The German military machine began roaring back to life. The size of the army was enlarged heavily and Germany began actively developing an air-force and navy.

Germany began setting up diplomatic relations and cementing alliances with foreign nations. They began with the Anti-Comintern Pact in 1936 in which they and Japan agreed to declare war on the Soviet Union if either nation was attacked. Italy joined on November 6th of the following year.

Spain’s Descent into Fascism

On the 17th of July, 1936, a failed Spanish coup led to the Spanish Civil War between the Nationalists and Republicans.

The Nationalist side gained great support from Germany, Italy and Portugal.

The Republican side saw only major support from the Soviet Union and minor assistance from Mexico as France and Britain decided to stay neutral.

By 1939, the Fascist Nationalist side was victorious and Francisco Franco became dictator of Spain.

Japan Looks Outward

On July 7th, 1937, the Japanese staged a false-flag incident on the Marco Polo Bridge blaming it on the Chinese and demanding massive territorial concessions. On August 13th, Japan declared war starting the 2nd Sino-Japanese War seeing huge victories.

Like with Ethiopia, the League of Nations was content in its neutrality.

Appeasement

On May 28th, 1937, Neville Chamberlain was elected Prime Minister of Britain beginning a policy of appeasement towards Germany.

Germany began its first major act of expansion during the Anschluss of Austria. On March 13th, 1938, Germany invaded Austria and staged a vote in which a suspicious 99.9% of the populace voted to be annexed by Germany. Maybe it had to do with the ballet;



In July, the U.S. and Britain stopped accepting Jewish refugees. On October 5th, Jews were reissued passports with the letter “J” on them after Sweden and Switzerland requested an easier way of denying Jews into their countries. On September 27, U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt sent a letter to Hitler seeking peace.

Germany expanded further on September 30th. The Germans demanded that Czechoslovakia cede the Sudetenland territory which had a German majority population seeking autonomy. The “Sudeten Crisis” was resolved when Britain, France, Italy, and Germany signed the Munich Agreement giving the Sudetenland to Germany in exchange for the end of German expansion. Czechoslovakia was not invited to attend.


Shortly after, Poland demanded the territory of Zaolzie which Czechoslovakia ceded.

On November 2nd, the First Vienna Award signed by Germany, Italy, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia ceded Southern Slovakia and Carpathia to Hungary. This cemented Hungary’s allegiance to Germany.


On March 15th of 1939, Germany invalidated the Munich Agreement by invading Czechoslovakia. The Czechs showed little resistance as most of their defensive positions had been built in the Sudetenland.


They created the protectorates of Bohemia and Moravia and created the state of Slovakia under a puppet Regime led by Josef Tiso.

On March 20th, German Foreign Minister Joachim von Ribbentrop delivered an oral ultimatum to Lithuania demanding they cede the former German territory of Memel. Facing invasion from East Prussia, Lithuania yielded to German demands. The next day, Germany demanded the return of the Free City of Danzig. Two days later, Germany signed a treaty of Development of Economic Relations with Romania bringing the two closer.


On the 31st, France and Britain had had enough and guaranteed the independence of Poland. However, on April 18th, they rejected a proposition of a tripartite alliance with the Soviet Union.

On April 7th, Italy invaded Albania. In 5 days, Albania was annexed into a personal union between the Italian and Albanian crowns.


On May 17th, Sweden, Norway, and Denmark refused German offers for non-aggression pacts. Sweden, however, continued cooperating heavily with the Germans trading with them and allowing the flow of troops from occupied Denmark and Norway into Finland during the war.

On May 22nd, the Pact of Steel officially formed an alliance between Germany and Italy.


On August 23rd, Germany surprised the world by signing an alliance with the Soviet Union. The Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact agreed that the Soviet Union would not intervene against Germany in any future wars. A secret addendum agreed to the separation of German and Soviet spheres of influence. The Soviet sphere included Finland, Estonia, Latvia , Bessarabia, and Eastern Poland while the German sphere included Lithuania and Western Poland. The treaty gave Germany the ability to wage war in Europe without fear of Soviet intervention.


Finally, on August 30th, Germany sent an ultimatum to Poland over the Polish Corridor and Danzig the territories giving Poland access to the sea. 2 days later, with no answer, Germany invaded Poland plunging the world into war.

And so we enter the war with an immediate advantage for the Axis powers allowing for the occupation of most of continental Europe.